---

title = "Enabling not Disabiling"
slug = "enabling-not-disabling"
recommended = true
weight = "10"
frontPage = true

publishDate = "2012-04-06"
date = "2016-05-23"
draft = false

topics = [ "Thoughts", "Writing", "Rants" ]
disabilities = [ "Wheelchair Users" ]
content = [ "Ableism" ]

image = false
imageAltText = ""

---

I find the social attitudes towards me when I'm in my wheelchair perplexing; to me my wheelchairs are really enabling, they allow me to get out of the house and be independent when I wouldn't otherwise be able to. But when other people see me in my chair there's this automatic assumption that I'm suddenly I'm not capable of doing anything by myself, even up to speaking or making decisions for myself. Which is really frustrating and condescending. <!--more-->

The biggest access barrier I find when using my wheelchair is the social attitudes towards me being disabled, even more so when my medical conditions that affect me when I'm out and about or coping with using a wheelchair in a now very physically accessible world. People just stop seeing me, a young, fairly fit, girl and just see the wheelchair. Which I find really frustrating as I'm actually more agile and capable in my wheelchair than I am out of it. So while I'm not up to the kind of fitness of the people who can do sports in their wheelchair, I kind of wish I was as the people who play on stake parks in their wheelchairs make me really envious as I miss that kind of thing. I am in okay shape and while I have energy problems my body is physically robust and happily withstands me falling over quite a bit. It took me a long time to accept that I should and could use one. As when I first developed my medical conditions I was cagy that 'I wasn't disabled enough' to use a wheelchair and struggled on walking places because I could and just ended in not being able to do stuff that I wanted to do as I wouldn't use aids. I still have this from time to time, because I can, and do, walk I worry that people will judge me badly for using my wheelchair. But for the most part they allow me to get out by myself and have better quality of life than I would otherwise have. I mean I do 'count' as disabled using either the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medical_model_of_disability">Medical Model of Disability</a> and the <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_model_of_disability">Social Model of Disability</a>, so that I'm disabled is a given. So I shouldn't feel guilty about using any aids that help me in day to day life, so I try to do just that.

But people see the wheelchair and suddenly treat me as if I'm made of glass, or even worse, not capable of deciding for myself what I am and am not capable of doing. Which is really frustrating and condescending, I will ask for help if I need it, but for the most part I can manage quite well and miss the independence that I had when I was healthy, so try to get back to that. While it's nice when people do things like hold doors for me or move out of my way on the pavement it's also annoying when they're only doing as a special favour because of my wheelchair. There's this expectation that suddenly they're an amazing person for being kind to me in the wheelchair when they wouldn't have done the same for a non wheelchair user (either able bodied (hate that term) or invisible disabled person).

I just find it so frustrating, as a fair amount of the time while I know people are trying to be helpful to me they're more hindering me than helping. I mean leaving aside the people who try and push my chair for me, mostly without asking, as those people are down right rude as far as I'm concerned when I'm in my chair it's like my clothes, you wouldn't grab someones clothes and try and move them, so don't do it to my wheelchair. Anyway that rant aside (as I could fill pages) people seem to try to help but they don't even ask and their help is not needed, quite frequently it ends up making things more awkward. A good example of this is lift doors, I can quite happily stick my own arm or foot into the doors to keep them open but people do it for me and end up blocking the doorway in the process as they haven't allowed for the width of the chair. The same with holding doors open for me, it's nice but half the time there's no way of doing it without getting in the way as I can't make myself thiner by turning sideways like people walking can. It's similar with getting on busses / trains, I'll normally wait to be the last person on / off the bus / train because I'm wide enough to block the door, or need to wait for a ramp or just don't need someone behind me rushing me. I get it a lot getting on busses when someone will get on behind me and then when I stop to reverse into the wheelchair space will find them stood right behind me stoping me getting out of their way.

I could go on, but this is going to be long enough as it is, suffice to say that people really need to think thought what they're doing more. So while it's nice that some people will be considerate, people really need to think their consideration though, and ask themselves would they do it for someone not in a wheelchair and are they hampering me being able to do something. As most of the time they wouldn't and they are, which is just stressful for both of us.

*Background:*
This was inspired by an interesting experience on the train home the other day, it was just a local train (<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Rail_Class_156">Class 156</a>), so I was able to board it in my self-propelled wheelchair, at Nottingham Station, without any problem. When the train manager came round he asked if I needed the ramp to get off at Beeston Station, but I was with it and not exhausted so I didn't need the ramp and could manage the small step from the train to the platform without the ramp or getting out of my chair so I said I was fine. Which he was cool with, which isn't that unusual for the local train managers, it just tends to be the long distance train managers who get iffy about things. But anyways, I was cool with getting off by myself and the train manager was happy to let me so I didn't think there was a problem. Then this random guy from sat a couple of rows down has a go at the train manager for not using the ramp and telling me I should insist that he allow me to use it. Which I really didn't get as he did ask, I declined and all was well in my mind. But for some reason this guy had it in his head that I had to use the ramp and that somehow the train manager was causing a problem by allowing me to sort my self out.
After the train manager had left the random guy continued his rant towards me, telling me that I was disabled and shouldn't be putting myself at risk. Despite me telling this guy several times that I was fine and that if I needed help I would ask for it. As I went to get off the train this guy followed me to the door telling me he was going to help me, I wasn't sure what he was intending to do, as the ramp is attached to the wall and needs a square T Key to remove. I was slightly worried that he was going to grab my chair as I made the step down, which would have been bad as he could have changed my balance making me fall or ended up taking the 100~ kg of me, my chair and my backpack onto his arms which would have hurt him. Thankfully he didn't do anything but glare me and rant about how I shouldn't be putting myself at risk because I was disabled.
Thing is it's a thing I've done several times, the drop is only about 20 cm and there's no real gap, so it's not a problem for me, well in my self propelled wheelchair, it would be impossible in my power chair. I didn't need help and get frustrated went train managers insist I use the ramp when I don't need to, if I'm not well enough to make the drop safely or in my power chair I'll ask for the ramp. But I didn't need it and was very frustrated at this random stranger who thought he knew my capabilities better than I did.